README.md, before:

# MCDA Toolkit

[![](https://img.shields.io/nuget/vpre/McdaToolkit?style=for-the-badge&label=Pre-release)](https://www.nuget.org/packages/McdaToolkit)
[![](https://img.shields.io/nuget/v/McdaToolkit?style=for-the-badge&label=Stable)](https://www.nuget.org/packages/McdaToolkit)
[![License](https://img.shields.io/github/license/SarcasticMoose/mcda-toolkit?style=for-the-badge)](https://github.com/SarcasticMoose/mcda-toolkit/blob/master/LICENSE.txt)

## 🧭 Introduction

MCDA Toolkit is a lightweight and flexible .NET library designed to support Multi-Criteria Decision Analysis (MCDA) processes. 
It helps developers and analysts structure, evaluate, and solve decision-making problems.

## 🚀 Key Features

🧩 .NET 6 and .NET Standard 2.0 Compatibility
Fully compatible with both .NET 6 and .NET Standard 2.0, ensuring support for a wide range of application

🧠 Simple and Intuitive API
Built with a fluent interface that makes setup fast and readable. Easily configure decision-making data with minimal code and maximum clarity.

⚡ Quick Integration
Plug-and-play design means you can get started in seconds. No complex setup or learning curve—just import and go.

## Documentation

Make sure to read the [docs](https://sarcasticmoose.github.io/mcda-toolkit-docs)

## Dependencies

- [Math.Net Numerics](https://numerics.mathdotnet.com/)
- [Light Results](https://github.com/jscarle/LightResults)

## Quick Example

Here's a simple example to show how to prepare and structure your data for an MCDA calculation using the MCDA Toolkit.

### 1️⃣   Define the Decision Matrix
Each row represents an alternative, and each column corresponds to a criterion.
```csharp
double[,] matrix = new double[,]
{
    { 66, 56, 95 },
    { 61, 55, 166 },
    { 65, 49, 113 },
    { 95, 56, 99 },
    { 63, 43, 178 },
    { 74, 59, 140 },
};
```


### 2️⃣   Prepare Weights
They must be double values between 0 and 1, and must ``sum to 1``
```csharp
double[] weights = new double[]
{
    0.4, 0.25, 0.35
};
```
### 3️⃣   Define Criteria Types

Each criterion is marked as either a cost (-1) or a benefit (1).
```csharp
int[] types = new int[]
{
    -1, -1, 1
};
```

### 4️⃣  Build the Data Object
```csharp
var data = new DataProviderBuilder()
    .AddWeights(weights)            
    .AddDecisionCriteria(types)      
    .AddDecisionMatrix(matrix)       
    .Build();                     
```

### 5️⃣  Create MCDA method
```csharp
var vikor = MethodFactory
    .CreateVikor(new VikorOptions())
```

### 6️⃣  Run
```csharp
var result = vikor.Run(data);
```

## Outcome

The result of the calculation is returned as an object of type ``Result<T>``, provided by the [LightResults](https://github.com/jscarle/LightResults) library. 
This structure not only contains the output data ``Value``, but also encapsulates information about whether the operation failed or succeed.

Before accessing the ``Value`` property of the result object, it is essential to verify that the operation completed successfully. 
Attempting to access the value without this check may throw ``InvalidOperationException``

This approach follows the principles of Railway Oriented Programming, 
a functional programming pattern that models the flow of data along two possible tracks — one for success and one for failure. 

More about ``Result`` type can be readed on official [LightResult documentation ](https://jscarle.github.io/LightResults/)

Example returned success result:

```csharp
Ranking<double>()
{
    RankingItems = List<RankingRow<double>>()
    {
        RankingRow<double>
        {
            Alternative = 1,
            Rank = 6,
            Score = 0.417
        },
        RankingRow<double>
        {
            Alternative = 2,
            Rank = 2,
            Score = 0.552
        },
        RankingRow<double>
        {
            Alternative = 3,
            Rank = 4,
            Score = 0.54
        },
        RankingRow<double>
        {
            Alternative = 4,
            Rank = 3,
            Score = 0.54
        },
        RankingRow<double>
        {
            Alternative = 5,
            Rank = 5,
            Score = 0.429
        },
        RankingRow<double>
        {
            Alternative = 6,
            Rank = 1,
            Score = 0.568
        }
    }
};
```

Commit message:

Release 4.0.0-rc3 (#45)
* feat: added Ranking<T> and RankingRow<T>
feat!: removed IMcdaMethod interface
feat!: removed all Scores that are simple types
feat!: simplified inheritance of mcda methods

* feat: updated namespaces
feat: finished uniforming ranking data

* feat: changed access

* feat: updated readme with Ranking structure

* feat(README): added info about pre-release packages

* feat(README): removed info about full API and added info about docs is under construction

* Update README.md

* fix(README.md): updated docs path

* fix(README.MD): remove /docs/ part from docs path

* feat(Ranking): change visibility of constructor to internal

* feat(Ranking): changed namespaces

* chore: bump LightResults to 9.0.3
feature: adjusted logic for breaking changes from LightResults

* renamed DefaultDataProviderBuilder.cs to DataBuilder.cs
removed McdaOptions and and all inheriting classes
removed McdaFactory

* revert package changes

* changed version from 4.0.0-rc1 to 4.0.0-rc2

* feat: simplify data providing inside McdaToolkit core

* Create pr-check.yml

* refactor!: adjusted namespaces
feat(PROMETHEE): removed unnamed preference function
docs: added missing documentation across library
build: added generation of XML from <summary> blocks after each build
refactor!: changed enumeration of NormalizationMethod enum (starts from 1)
refactor!: changed enumeration of PreferenceFunction enum (starts from 1)
refactor!: changed Ranking<T> to be struct
refactor!: changed RankingRow<T> to be struct
feat(VALIDATION): added validation exception

* chore: bumped package version

* refactor!: added DataBuilder ctor as private, and Create method initiate
docs: adjusted README for current code

README.md, after:

# MCDA Toolkit

[![](https://img.shields.io/nuget/vpre/McdaToolkit?style=for-the-badge&label=Pre-release)](https://www.nuget.org/packages/McdaToolkit)
[![](https://img.shields.io/nuget/v/McdaToolkit?style=for-the-badge&label=Stable)](https://www.nuget.org/packages/McdaToolkit)
[![License](https://img.shields.io/github/license/SarcasticMoose/mcda-toolkit?style=for-the-badge)](https://github.com/SarcasticMoose/mcda-toolkit/blob/master/LICENSE.txt)

**MCDA Toolkit** is a lightweight .NET library designed to support Multi-Criteria Decision Analysis (MCDA) tasks. It helps developers and analysts define and solve decision-making problems, from simple comparisons to more structured evaluation models.

### 🚀 Key Features
**.NET 6** and **.NET Standard 2.0** Support
Compatible with both .NET 6 and .NET Standard 2.0, making it suitable for modern applications as well as legacy or cross-platform projects.

### ⚡ Easy to Use
Designed to be simple and straightforward — no unnecessary setup, no configuration files. You can define and run a decision model with just a few lines of code.

## Documentation

Make sure to read the [docs](https://sarcasticmoose.github.io/mcda-toolkit-docs)

## Dependencies

- [Math.Net Numerics](https://numerics.mathdotnet.com/)
- [Light Results](https://github.com/jscarle/LightResults)

## Quick Example

Here's a simple example to show how to prepare and structure your data for an MCDA calculation using the MCDA Toolkit.

### 1️⃣   Define the Decision Matrix
Each row represents an alternative, and each column corresponds to a criterion.
```csharp
double[,] matrix = new double[,]
{
    { 66, 56, 95 },
    { 61, 55, 166 },
    { 65, 49, 113 },
    { 95, 56, 99 },
    { 63, 43, 178 },
    { 74, 59, 140 },
};
```


### 2️⃣   Prepare Weights
They must be double values between 0 and 1, and must ``sum to 1``
```csharp
double[] weights = new double[]
{
    0.4, 0.25, 0.35
};
```
### 3️⃣   Define Criteria Types

Each criterion is marked as either a cost (-1) or a benefit (1).
```csharp
int[] types = new int[]
{
    -1, -1, 1
};
```

### 4️⃣  Build the Data Object
```csharp
var data = DataBuilder
    .Create()
    .AddWeights(weights)
    .AddDecisionCriteria(types)
    .AddDecisionMatrix(matrix)
    .Build();                    
```

### 5️⃣  Create MCDA method
```csharp
var vikor = VikorBuilder
    .Create()
    .WithNormalizationMethod(NormalizationMethod.Vector)
    .WithVParameter(0.5)
    .Build();
```

### 6️⃣  Run
```csharp
var result = vikor.Run(data);
```

## Outcome

The result of the calculation is returned as an object of type Result<Ranking<T>>, provided by the [LightResults](https://github.com/jscarle/LightResults) library.
It encapsulates both the Ranking<T> and information about whether the operation succeeded or failed.

Example returned success result:

This approach follows the principles of Railway Oriented Programming, 
a functional programming pattern that models the flow of data along two possible tracks — one for success and one for failure. 

More about ``Result`` type can be readed on official [LightResult documentation ](https://jscarle.github.io/LightResults/)

Example returned success result:

```csharp
Ranking<double>()
{
    RankingItems = List<RankingRow<double>>()
    {
        RankingRow<double>
        {
            Alternative = 1,
            Rank = 6,
            Score = 0.417
        },
        RankingRow<double>
        {
            Alternative = 2,
            Rank = 2,
            Score = 0.552
        },
        RankingRow<double>
        {
            Alternative = 3,
            Rank = 4,
            Score = 0.54
        },
        RankingRow<double>
        {
            Alternative = 4,
            Rank = 3,
            Score = 0.54
        },
        RankingRow<double>
        {
            Alternative = 5,
            Rank = 5,
            Score = 0.429
        },
        RankingRow<double>
        {
            Alternative = 6,
            Rank = 1,
            Score = 0.568
        }
    }
};
```
